move over fast radio burst there's a new
astrophysics
unexplained mystery that everyone's
excited about
and they're called orcs the time
of the orc has come
not those orcs they're called odd radio
circles
they're big they're faint they only give
off radio waves
and they're an astrophysics unsolved
mystery
so four of these things that have been
dubbed orcs were discovered
in an all-sky radio survey called ascap
in australia in late 2019 by anna
kapinska
and the research paper describing the
discovery was put on what's called the
astronomy
archive server it's sort of where we
post all of our most recent work that
hasn't yet been peer reviewed but you
still want to kind of announce it to
the world while it goes through all of
that like peer review process
to finally get published which is what
has happened now in mid-january 2021
this work
by norris and collaborators has been
published in the astronomy society of
australia
journal and so that's why we're chatting
about them now but to be honest
there's so much that we still don't know
about these odd radio circles in fact
this paper is actually
the only research paper that's actually
been published
about them but you can bet that even as
we speak there are radio astronomers
that are trolling
new data and old archive data to try and
find more of these orcs
[Music]
so i guess we should go through first
what we do know about these orcs and
that's literally from
the observations we've got them from
these images in the ascap
survey so we know that they are quite
large sort of relatively
speaking anyway they're about an arc
minute across it's about three percent
of the size of
the full moon just sort of for context
if you compare that to you know stars
which are just
tiny little points it's kind of fairly
large
in the sky they appear highly circular
and although they're very very faint
they're much brighter on the
edges of the circle than they are
towards the middle they're only visible
in radio waves so if you look at the
exact same part of the sky
with an optical telescope that uses
visible light or a uv telescope or
infrared telescope you don't
see anything it's not like you see sort
of like a faint fuzz there's just
nothing there that looks anything like
this round structure what you do see
though in two of the four orcs
is maybe there's a galaxy in the middle
of them but it's very small because it's
very very far away and so the question
is whether the galaxy has actually
anything to do
with those orcs especially because only
two of them have a galaxy that looks to
be in the middle and
two of them don't so when you find
something like this
in astronomy images which is weird
and not anything that you've seen before
there's two questions you need to answer
right the first one
is it actually a real thing that you've
observed
and two is it a new thing that you've
what is this new definitely so let's
start with that first one trying to
determine if it is actually real so what
do i actually mean by this
well you have to work out whether what
you've taken an image of
is actually something in space like a
real object in space
and it's not just some weird fluke of
the camera or the telescope that you're
using
especially if you do a bad deconvolution
now deconvolution is essentially just a
fancy word for like
enhance enhance enhance freeze and
enhance
essentially you can remove the effects
of the atmosphere that distort
your images you sort of looking through
the atmosphere to something
in space if you do that wrong though and
you do a
bad enhancement or deconvolution of your
image then you can
end up with an imprint of a circle on
your image it's essentially just an
imprint of the resolution
of the telescope by the smallest thing
that the telescope can see
but it's very clearly a circle so you
can imagine why the astronomers were a
little bit
wary when they found these circle-like
things in their image that it might have
been just
a bad deconvolution but i have to find
them in the ascap survey data
the authors then observe the same part
of the sky but with the australia
telescope compact array or atka that's
another radio telescope with a different
resolution entirely and also it uses a
different
algorithm or different piece of software
to deconvolve its images to get rid of
that atmospheric distortion and they
found
these odd radio circles were still there
in those images and crucially they
actually had the same
size as was first seen in the as cap
images as well so that suggested it was
real if you could do
a repeat observation of it so that was
sort of like the first job done it was
kind of like a phew
these things are real the site meets
back on the menu boys
but of course once you prove they're
real you've kind of made more work for
yourself because then you've got to
prove that it's something new as well
which essentially involves just
trolling the literature reading all of
the past research papers that have been
published by radio astronomers and
optical astronomers and everybody
alike and trying to go through all the
possibilities and ruling them out
one by one because the thing is circles
in radio images
aren't rare things at all in fact we do
see circles very often essentially
they're produced by
shock waves anything that's a circular
object that then
expels material in all directions will
give you
a circle so for example supernova
leftovers give you circles in radio
images
planetary nebula which are left over
from the death of stars like the sun
which are
too small to go supernova they give you
radio circles too
or even like shells of material around
stars that pulse these are
all things though that we see in our own
milky way galaxy and that kind of would
make sense and it would explain
why these odd radio circles these orcs
are so large because if it was in our
milky way they'd be a lot closer if it
was something that was like extra
galactic that was
in another galaxy outside our milky way
but norris and collaborators in this
research paper where they announced this
discovery essentially went through all
of these possibilities
and ruled them all out already so for
example they first
ruled out the fact that they could be
relics of a supernova remnant for
example like in our own milky way galaxy
because the majority of supernova are
all concentrated in what we call the
milky way plane because the milky way is
a
flat spiral disc shape so in the sky you
see that as a
sort of a long thin thing running
through the sky and those are the
coordinates that you tend to see the
majority of supernova remnants because
well that's where the most
stars are but these odd radio circles
were coming from
out of the galactic plane sort of up and
out
of the galaxy then the planetary nebula
were ruled out
because this spread in the wavelengths
the radio wavelengths that you got from
these orcs was nothing like what you'd
expect to get from a planetary nebula it
didn't look anything like it
and then the sort of shells of material
that were given off by these pulsating
stars was also ruled out because
stars are very very small and so the
shells around them were quite small
in comparison to these one arc minute
diameter that had been seen for these
orcs
so that kind of ruled out all of the
possibilities in the milky way
suggesting that they were actually
something
extra galactic like for example could
they be associated
with a ring galaxy like the cartwheel
galaxy which we've talked about on this
channel
before because these usually have radio
waves coming from
this ring around the galaxy where
there's lots and lots of stars forming
but one very simple observation rules
that out and it's the fact that there's
no
great big whopping ring galaxy that is
coincident
with these odd radio circles like
considering like the size that you'd
expect for
a typical galaxy in a typical ring
galaxy and the size of the odd radio
circle
that you that we actually observe we
could estimate sort of like the distance
that we'd expect a galaxy to be at and
if it wasn't that distance we should
very easily be able to spot it it
shouldn't just be like a fuzzy blob like
what might be at the middle of them it
should be
like beautiful and resolved in one of
these incredible pictures like you see
of the cartwheel galaxy
or hoax object or something like that
other things like einstein rings caused
by gravitational lensing because of
general relativity
bending space time are also ruled out
for the same reason because there's
no optical or even infrared emission
coming from
the same place in the sky so if it's
none of the known things then i guess
the million quid question
is still what are these orcs
do you know how the orcs first came into
being
so the authors of this paper norris and
collaborators their best guess right now
for what
these things are is one of two things
the first thing they say
is that it could be something we've seen
before
but we're just seeing it from a
different angle
so for example the radio jets given off
from the surrounding regions around
growing supermassive black holes in the
centers
of galaxies i like to say these growing
supermassive black holes are
burping but remember the stuff doesn't
come from the actual black hole itself
because nothing can escape a black hole
it comes from the the surrounding
regions and so they suggest that perhaps
we're looking
at one of these big radio galaxies
that's giving out all of this radio
emission in these jets but
down the barrel of the jet as if we're
sort of just seeing it
edge on the problem is of course once
again that there
isn't a galaxy where this growing super
massive black hole that's anywhere
near these orcs in the sky sure two of
them
have you know a very distant faint
little smudge of a galaxy
that looks to be in the center of them
that could be something to do with them
but we'd know about it if they had a
growing supermassive black hole because
they're incredibly bright
weirdly the gas that's spiraling around
them that's going to get eaten by the
black hole the black hole is going to
use
to grow heats up because it's moving at
such incredible incredible speeds and as
it heats up it starts to glow
very very brightly across all the
optical uv x-ray
everything we call these quasars which
is a word you might have heard before
and we can see them to
incredible distances or some of the most
distant objects that we can actually
detect quasars so
if those galaxies had a growing
supermassive black hole in the middle it
would be
really really obvious
now of course the black hole could just
not be growing anymore and we could be
seeing some sort of radio relic of what
was there before
but what puts paid to that idea is the
fact that the orcs
are brighter around the edges and it's
this edge brightening that just doesn't
make sense for what we
expect with radio jets that come from
the regions around supermassive black
holes
and it's this brightening around the
edge that really is the thing we have to
go off here and it's sort of what norris
and collaborators sort of tuck and run
because if we had a circular object in
space that had maybe
exploded or sent off a shock wave out
into space in all directions
then we would definitely expect to see a
brightening
at the edge of that shockwave now
there's lots
of different things that could come
under that header including supernova
which we've already rolled out
but there's lots of newly discovered
things that could also
maybe be described like that by a
circular
object that's giving off some form of
shockwave or explosion for example
fast radio bursts as well could possibly
be something to do with magnetars we
think but the sort of jury is still out
on that one and perhaps
that could be some shock wave that's
sent out and produces one of these odd
radio circles
gamma-ray bursts as well similarly but
then also neutron star neutron star
mergers that have been detected
in gravitational waves by the the ligo
and virgo observatories as well they're
all now contenders for these odd radio
circles and they wouldn't necessarily
have to be
from you know neutron star neutron star
merger in our own milky way galaxy or a
fast radio burst in our own milky way
galaxy because
most of the fast radio bursts we
detected it extra galactic as well so it
would still make sense in terms of the
size
but for the size that the odd radio
circle is if it did come from just
you know a magnetar or a neutron star
neutron star merger in another galaxy
it's so much bigger than the galaxy
itself it would mean that it
sort of been traveling that shockwave
for a very very long
time and that would explain you know why
they're so big and perhaps so faint
as well so anything that did trigger
them would have happened so long ago
that there's probably nothing there that
we can now
observe or see in terms of a fast radio
burst or a gamma-ray burst or anything
like that now we have to remember that
they've only found
four of these orcs that's a tiny number
to go off really what we need is to find
a lot
more of them and then we can figure out
you know what's more
likely from what we've actually observed
and perhaps it'll turn out that they're
not actually
all described by the same thing perhaps
uh
they sort of look similar but actually
you know two of these orcs could be
described by one thing
like a neutron star major or something
and two of them can be described by the
radio jets or something like that
we just don't really know enough about
them right now and that's why
you know we're still in sort of the
murky realms of small number statistics
and we can't really make
any firm conclusions yet i guess you
could say that radio astronomers are
just waiting for the day that the
literature is just
swarming with ops so one thing is for
sure
until we find more of these orcs and we
get more data on them
they are going to remain an unsolved
mystery
before you get to watch me make mistakes
in the bloopers i just want to take a
minute to thank this week's video
sponsor
brilliant brilliant is a website in an
app that makes learning
accessible interactive and most
importantly
fun it's all about active learning
getting you to really
interact with the concepts and really
visualize what's going on so that you're
much more likely to remember
what you've learned they have a huge
range of courses from all areas of
science maths
and computing now i'm really excited
about their new statistics one course
which covers
all the essential statistic methods and
ideas that scientists like myself use to
determine if our results are significant
even with limited data like the four
awks we had in this video
everything from p-values to chi-squared
statistics is in this course and i'd
recommend it to all budding scientists
out there
so if that sounds like you and you want
to support me and my channel then head
to
brilliant.org forward slash dr becky
that's d-r-b-e-c-k-y
and sign up completely for free plus the
first 200 people that go to
that link which is in the video
description below will get 20 off an
annual premium subscription so thank you
so much
to brilliant and now are all those
bloopers
my email just binged and i have no idea
where it binged from because
oh my laptop's behind me all right we
did that whole opening section with my
laptop open behind me but never mind
not doing it again so these four orcs
were discovered in an all-sky
radio survey done using the azcat
telescope in australia
as cat that's cap it's not a cat
they're taking the hobbits to eisenguard